As a manager, you are responsible for
ensuring that all commitments and expenditures
are monitored throughout the year
and that they are accurately recorded in the financial system.
This monitoring is both at a transactional level and at a strategic level.
Depending on the situation,
it may involve one or more of the following actions:
Closing commitments that are no longer required.
Amending contracts for scope, time, and amount.
Updating the salary forecast to reflect your current and planned staffing needs.
Planning for potential budget shortfalls or pressures.
Flagging budget surpluses to senior management.
And making expenditure adjustments.
Let’s play with a few examples.
Taking care of your budget is really important
because the decisions you make within your budget
may influence your sector, your branch,
or even your department.
At the end of the fiscal year,
you will need to justify any deficits or surpluses.
Depending on your department,
you may need to be within a certain percentage of your forecasts.
On the one hand, overspending can cause a deficit,
which puts a lot of pressure on senior management
to find additional sources of funds to compensate.
On the other hand, a surplus should be flagged as early as possible
so that your unit doesn’t miss an opportunity to reallocate
unused funds to another activity,
or another unit.
Monthly reports help you track your financials.
They are sometimes called “financial situation reports”
or FSRs and are usually produced by the Finance team within your organization.
What is in the FSR needs to match what is actually going on in your unit.
If it doesn’t, then you need to take appropriate action
to resolve the discrepancy.
In the next activity, you will have a chance to review
and adjust your financial situation according to new information.
Since most budgets are allocated by Parliament on
an annual basis and must be used within the fiscal year,
goods and services must be received on or before March 31.
However, you will most likely have a number of outstanding expenditures
that you will not be able to pay before the end of the fiscal year
for goods that are in your possession.
To help with that, the Finance unit will establish
Payables at Year-End or Receivables at Year-End in the financial system
after receiving your list of outstanding payables.
A P-A-Y-E is an amount owed for
goods and/or services
delivered in the old fiscal year
using old year funds
but paid in the new fiscal year
when the supplier invoice is received.
An R-A-Y-E is an amount due from another department
for goods and/or services
delivered in the old fiscal year,
for which receipt of payment will be in the new fiscal year.
Usually, again depending on the practices
within your department—
Finance will send out year-end instructions
about how to establish a P-A-Y-E or an R-A-Y-E.
These instructions will also include specific requirements
with respect to the minimum dollar amount and the timeline.
Contracts can be a bit tricky when we are close to
the end of the fiscal year.
Here are a couple of things to keep in mind:
One, pay attention to the deadlines set by Procurement.
You may not be able to create a purchase order as you approach year-end.
Two, follow with suppliers to make sure that the goods
or services will be delivered before year-end.
If it's not possible before March 31,
the expenditures will have to be paid using new year funding.
Talk to Procurement about possible steps.
So now that you know how to initiate expenditures,
authorize commitments,
exercise financial authority and monitor and control finances,
let’s see what you remember by taking this short quiz.